...with Mike Sullivan by Tammy Lawrence on March
14th concerning the Vietnam War where he more or
less had a scenic tour in combat. In the
interesting of accumulating knowledge about the
war, I'm going to donate this tape to the Texas A&M
Oral History Collection and University
Archives. Is this all right with you, Mr.
Sullivan? Yes. Okay. Can you tell me a little bit
about, tell me where you were born and the day of
your birth? I was born in Lubbock, Texas,
September the 20th, 1943. When I was in 11th grade,
I'd been to 11 different schools. My father was
killed in World War II. My mother remarried, and my
stepfather started putting in Hertz rental car
stations all over Texas and Louisiana. And I
graduated high school in Alamo Garden, New
Mexico. After graduation in 1962, I went to Texas
Tech, graduated there in 1966.
Okay, Mr. Sullivan, can you tell me a little bit
about the reasons why you joined the military and
the years that you were in service?
My last semester of school, my draft board had
tried to get me tried to draft me three times my last
semester before I finished. And so I was motivated
at that point to go into a service that I had little
choice about. And I chose the Army. He chose the
Army. So after you graduated from school, you
volunteered in the service just because they were
pressuring you while you were in school to join?
That was partly it. I was planning on going into the
Army anyway. I didn't really know what i was going
to do in my professional life and i thought it would
give me a little time to think about that too were
you kind of motivated since your dad fought in
world war ii uh oh i guess i was somewhat i guess most
men think that the military is just a natural part
of their life and you just kind of do that at some
time in your life i did anyway So what year was it
that you started? I joined the Army in 1966. I
enlisted in the Army as a private E-1. Went to Fort
Knox, Kentucky for basic training, advanced
armor training. And then I went to Officer
Candidate School. Graduated from that in May of 67
as an armor officer. And I went from there down to
Fort Polk, Louisiana, to a training company
there. From Fort Polk, I came down to order for
Vietnam in 1968. I
went to, before going to Vietnam, I went down to
Panama to go to Jungle Warfare Training School.
which was a three-week program. And then I left
there and went on to Vietnam. And I got there in
May of 68. At the train school in Panama, what kind
of train were they training you in? You said
jungle. Can you go in a little bit more detail?
Well, the canal zone, I believe, is on the 9th.
degree of latitude, which is the same latitude
that runs through Vietnam. So it had the same type
of temperament as far as weather and vegetation
and climate goes. So they're trying to get you used
to the climate and the weather? Right, acclimated
to the vegetation and What you need to, it's also a
survival type training in case you got out into,
you know, a jungle in which you could live off of
animals and certain plants and that kind of stuff.
But it was, it ran about 20 hours a day for three
weeks of training. You got about three to four
hours to sleep a night, if any. And you had night
operation. It was all infantry oriented tactics.
Such as? Which is just, uh, infantry is the ground
soldier type, you know, for, uh, like you'd have,
say, a class on what you might call like an L-shaped
ambush for instance, and this is the way you set it
up and you just practice, uh, things like that, uh,
you had escape and evasion, uh, training, uh, all
different types of plant and vegetable, what you
could eat and couldn't eat, what was poisonous,
not poisonous, medicinal plants that were
available, how to survive weather-wise, where to
get water from, either from plants or from the
ground, just survival type stuff. Did you feel
like this training in Panama helped you more in
Vietnam than if you hadn't had it? Yeah, it was real
good. What was probably more realistic than the
training was the number of hours that you spent
awake a day. So they had you used to staying up long
hours and going out without sleep for a while.
Right. And what that does, it also kind of trains
you. These were all officers that were down there.
And it kind of trains you. It shows you what happens
to you when you get tired. And you get a little
mentally, you know, pressed a little bit because
they really press you during the school. And so
it's the same type of pressures that are there
every day in Vietnam. So you might as well just get
used to it. And if you can see how it affects you,
then you're better able to control your people and
understand their situation. Understand what
they're going through and probably have a little
concern over them whereas if you didn't
understand. Right.
Okay. When you got, when you were going besides
this training in the field and stuff, they talked
to you about the Vietnamese culture such as their
religion and the ways they lived over there? Well,
uh, in your incoming orientation in Vietnam at uh
in Long Ben uh they had a a small class on the
cultural aspects and the politics a little bit of
the region it wasn't very much not very much at all
no
you're talking about a day a day that's all I told
you yeah then you find it quite hard okay let's
Before I get to that question, let's go to, you're
on the plane, you went by plane over there, and
where did you land? At Long Bend. Long Bend. Yeah.
Can you go on from what you did the first time you got
there? Well, how'd you feel about going over
there? Were you anxious or were you... Well, I
think everybody... You're probably a little
apprehensive because it's new, it's unknowing,
it's dangerous.
You've heard all the bad things, and you don't know
how you're going to react as an individual under a
lot of stress.
My consideration was I felt like I wanted to be an
officer because If I was going to get killed, then
I'd like to have a little bit to say so about it. You
could determine what you were going to be. Right.
At least I'd have some say so. I thought, you know,
and if I made a mistake, then it was my mistake and
not somebody else's mistake. And that was one of
the things that motivated me to go to OCS. So what
officer, what was your rank? When I was a first
lieutenant in Vietnam, I was an armor officer.
After I went through the initial incoming
orientation there, I was assigned to the 4th
Infantry Division up at Pleiku. And we went to
Pleiku, and I was assigned to the 2nd Squadron of
1st Cavalry Regiment. It's the oldest unit in the
United States Army. The cavalry? Yeah. Second and
first calf, what they call it. What did you do
there? When I got for two months, I was the,
what they call the S1, assistant S1, which was an
administrative type function. Officers, when
they go over there, spent six months in
administrative capacities and six months in the
field. So my, normally. That's kind of the way it
broke down. I got up there, and there again, as a
personal preference, I wanted to, there again, if
I was going to get killed, I just didn't get killed
the first six months as opposed to the last six
months, you know, so when I put it off, I worry about
it. Because most of the administrative positions
were not that dangerous, you know. You might be in a
in a base camp somewhere and they, you know, they
shoot artillery and, uh, you know, have sapper
attacks and stuff like that. But, uh, it's just
kind of chance type stuff. It wasn't, wasn't
really too dangerous at all. Uh, but part of my
duties being in that capacity was I attended the
evening briefing for General Stone, who was
commanding general at 4th infantry division. And
it was just kind of like you see in the movie. You got
all the maps on the wall. There are the good guys,
the bad guys. And you got to see how everything, the
Army, the Navy, the Air Force, you had special
forces, people who had mercenaries that were
working in the area. You had the ROPS, which was the
Republic of Korea, how those people functioned in
the system. And you got to see how it all kind of fit
together, which I thought was real interesting.
One
of the G5 of the 4th Division, which has to do with
psychological warfare and civil affairs, their
assistant G5 was leaving. He was leaving country
and going to go back to the United States. So G5
asked me if I wanted to come up and be assistant G5 on
general staff. for the 4th Division. I said, let me
go back and check with my unit. So I went back and
talked to my boss, who was the S-1. I said, when am I
going to get a platoon? And he said, well, I don't
know. Well, the deal was my boss was from West
Point. All of the officers in this particular unit
were from West Point except four. There's my son.
And S-1? In the whole unit, the second and first
half, everybody in it was from West Point. And it
was... They kind of resented y'all getting...
Well, let's just say they looked after the West
Pointers first, and if something else happened,
yeah, they'd stick somebody else in there. Well,
there was myself. I went to Texas Tech, and I was an
OCS graduate, and that's how I got my commission. A
guy lived next door to me. was from Texas A&M. He got
his commission through ROTC. There was another
kid from New York who was in OCS with me. He was a week
ahead of me. And he got his commission in OCS. And
then there was General Abram's son, John John, who
was a couple weeks behind me in OCS. And he got his
commission in ROTC, I mean in OCS. So we were the
only four reserve officers in the unit. Everybody
else was from West Point. So I asked my boss, when
was I going to get a platoon? He said he didn't
really know. And I said, well, you know, you've had
two lieutenants from West Point come in. So they
got their platoon as soon as they got there. So I've
been there longer than them. And he said, well,
that's just the way it is, Lieutenant. I said,
well, fine. So I went back and talked to the G5 and
see if the job was still open. He said, yes. And I
said, well, I would take it then. And so I went back
and told my boss that I was quitting there. He said,
well, you can't quit. And I said, yeah. I said, I
can. I said, I'm going to. And so, because General
Staff calls the shots. And they are the ultimate
authority there. And so I knew I could get on
General Staff. So I went up and I was Assistant G-5.
Well, my boss, the G-5, was... air defense
artillery officer and he stayed there for another
couple of months and then he was replaced and he
went back to the states and my new boss was an
armored colonel and i walked up to him reported sir
lieutenant sullivan and he said who are you i said i
possess the g5 he said not for long you're not he
said lieutenants belong in the field not on
general staffs So you got to go to the... And, you
know, so he said, where'd you come from? I said,
well, second to first cab. He said, you want to go
back there? I said, no, I don't want to go back
there. You know, I burned some bridges there, and I
didn't want to have to go back and have to rebuild.
And he said, well, where do you want to go? Well, the
infantry units had what they called mechanized
infantry, which is armored personnel carriers.
and they had infantry people who rode around and
armored personnel carriers. They had 1st and 22nd
Infantry, but I didn't want to go there either,
because I'd seen too many bad things happen to
armored personnel carriers. Because, I mean, one
little mine or something, they blow them apart and
nobody survives, you know. And I just think too
much of that, and I didn't want that. But then
there's the 1st and 10th Cav, which is another
armored unit, armored Cav unit, which is
basically the same thing. I didn't like that. And
then there's another unit, 1st and 69th Armor,
which was straight armor or all tanks. Well, I like
tanks, so I chose the 1st and 69th. And so I got out,
and I was a platoon leader with the 1st and 69th
Armor. And we, at this particular time, we were
operating north of Cameron, north of Quignon, up
in a place called like the Antelope Valley and
around Bongsong and 506 Valley, LZ English. So you
drove tanks? Right. I was a tank platoon leader. I
had five tanks and 19 men under my command. And then
we just went around. I was a I was attached to the
173rd Airborne.
So, they told me, he said, well, like my first day,
he said, well, you're going to be assigned to
Charlie Company, 2nd Battalion, 503rd Infantry
of the 173rd. He said, they're in such and such
location, go find them. So I did, and... How'd you
get, I mean, did they fly you, helicopter you into
where they were, or were they just real close to
you? Uh, no, from, from the tank unit? Yeah. No, we
just drove our tanks, you know. Okay. What was the
scenery around? Uh, the, the, the terrain, uh,
was, uh, kind of mountainous, and, uh, then along
the coastal areas was, was kind of, uh, You know,
sandy, beachy type places like you'd see on any
beach. Real pretty, lots of vegetation. But if you
went inland a little bit, then you got into more of
the mountainous type area.
Can you tell me what a usual day was like for you?
When I was with this armor unit, I was attached to
the 173rd, as I mentioned before. We did various
types of operations. They had what they called
search and rescue, which you may find somebody
might be trapped and you go in to help them get out.
They had search and destroy, where you knew that
they had either troops, supplies,
people that were giving them intelligent
information, and you would go out and you would
destroy whatever the situation was uh we did a lot
of uh i guess it's kind of like being uh in the police
department tell you just visible you know you're
out there and it interrupts you know there if they
if all of a sudden they see you here and you're over
there then they can't really make their plans so
you're kind of constantly on the move uh during the
daytime uh most of the uh the actual combat type
stuff for us took place at night, usually from
about 9 o'clock at night to 3 o'clock in the
morning, which are real high critical hours. And
we would, in our night location, we would pull our
tanks in, kind of like covered wagon style, and
with the front slopes of the tanks at the outside
and the main guns that way. You would have infantry
people between the tanks. and then you had your
backs to the inside of the circle. How big was the
circle? The circle, of course, sometimes depends
on how many tanks you had too. It was hard to keep
your tanks repaired. You were issued five most of
the time, probably had an average of three because
you were always having to get something fixed on
one and you'd have to take back to a base camp and a
part would have to be flown in. So you always had
something that was broken.
But let's say if I had five tanks, then probably
you're looking at a perimeter or
probably would encompass about
60, 80 yards in a circle type, you know, pretty big
area. And that'd probably be the diameter, you
know. And the infantry between them were dug in?
Right, they would dig in at night between each of
the tanks, you know. A normal rifle company of the
Say, like, 173rd calls for, I believe it's 156 men
as a full complement of filling every position.
They, too, usually operate on a whole lot less,
probably an average of about 85 people, which is
what they call a standard company, which was about
half staffed. And most of the times you probably
wouldn't have 85 in the origin? I mean, 85 is
probably an average. You know, 75 to 85 would be
what you're going to be playing with. So what was
the action like? Well, at night, and it's kind of
funny, on this first particular day that I've been
assigned to the 173rd, infantry people, straight
leg infantry types, are real nervous. You can kind
of imagine a cat in a room full of rocking chairs
with about a 10-foot tail on them. That's about
what they act like, and They're real jumpy and all
that kind of stuff. And tanks, these tanks weigh 52
tons apiece. They make noise. There's no way you
can hide one. You drive around. People hear you.
And infantry people are kind of like cats. They're
real quiet. They don't make a lot of noise. And when
we were with them, they didn't really know what to
quite think of us. because we made so much noise.
Well, the first night that we were with them, tanks
have, of course, in 1968,
we were just kind of getting into solid state type
electronics, but some of the radios still had a lot
of tubes in them, and they took a lot of a drain on the
batteries. Well, we had a lot of batteries, but we
had to charge the batteries up. The only way we
could do that was to start the tanks at night. Okay.
I started these tanks up about, you know,
midnight, and the company commander of the 173rd
came over to me and just went crazy, you know, I've
compromised our location, you know, he's getting
rid of us tomorrow, he don't want anything to do
with us, you know, without crazy or what, you know,
giving away our location, that kind of routine.
And he said, I don't want you guys, I'm getting rid
of you tomorrow. I said, well, that's fine,
there's always, you know, somebody else to play
with, you know. uh well they just weren't used to us
and uh i think that's probably uh common to a lot of
situations you know what you don't understand you
kind of a little leery of and and uh it just so
happened though that the next morning uh uh not
saying all the fighting takes place at night but
most of it does because They don't like to just run
up against American firepower because it's just
devastating. They couldn't beat it. That's
right, and they're not stupid. So you just
wouldn't want to just go up there and just get your
teeth kicked in just because you didn't have
anything else to do. So they used things to their
advantage, too, and mainly that was darkness. But
we had a way out for that, too, because all the tanks
had what they called xenon searchlights on them,
and they had... 200 million candle power, which
is, you turn one of those things up at midnight, and
it's just like 12 noon in a day. It's just daytime.
But it had the same infrared capability, so you
could do it at night, and you could see at night with
infrared without giving away your location,
unless they had infrared detectors, which they
had those too. But anyway, it just so happened that
the next day we got in a little firefight the next
day while we were still with the infantry people.
And, you know, if we catch troops in vegetation,
our standard round was what they call a fleshette
round. And it is just so devastating. They're like
little steel arrows, about an inch long. And it'll
clear a path about... 80 meters deep and about 200
meters wide. If you catch somebody out, they can't
get away from it. They're just caught and blown
away. They're just caught. They're blown away.
You cannot. It's just devastating. You could just
clear that path out. I mean, you just clear it out.
You catch them out in the open, they're just dead
ducks. You may find... They had another round
called a canister round, which is the same thing.
It's kind of like, if you can imagine, a bunch of
steel rods that are just packed down about 18
inches and then sliced up like little beanie
weenie type of deals. You know, a big weenie sliced
up like a big little weenie, about as thick as your
little finger. And those things, you could be in
real thick vegetation, you could pop one of those,
and you used to have instant daylight. I mean, it's
just, it's just so powerful. But anyway, we got in
this firefight, And we leaped on top of those guys,
you know, in just one way. And then the infantry
company commander thought, well, that's maybe
not so bad, you know. Let those suckers go out and
get them, you know. We'll just have them back and
look. And, of course, we weren't, you know, it was
not really any big deal to us. So, anyway, they
decided they, you know, would keep us. They'd hang
around a little bit, you know. And after a while, I
remember... One time, my troops, the armor
people, have to be supported. They have to have
fuel. They have to have diesel fuel. They have to
have ammunition. They have to have parts. We might
have to pull an engine out in the middle of the
jungle somewhere. They had kind of like a big
wrecker called a VTR, like a big wrecker on tracks
with a great big boom on it, and we'd pull
transmissions. We pulled engines, fixed them in
the field, you know, which makes you vulnerable
while you're doing that. But sometimes that
happens, and you have to go and make do. But anyway,
after I'd been there for about, oh, I guess a couple
weeks, well, actually after about a week, I
figured out that, you know, whoever you're
attached to in the Army, the rule is, that if I'm
attached to you, then you have to provide support
for me. But I could see after just a few days that the
173rd was just not equipped to support a tank
platoon. And so I just started having to provide my
own support. Well, in doing that, I thought, well,
I'll just go ahead and take care of them, too,
because we all used the same weapons. I could order
the ammunition, everything special that they
had. that I couldn't get for them was like 81
millimeter mortar ammunition. But all the rest of
it I could get for them. But I remember we were up in a
valley called the 506 Valley, which just had to be a
road number on a map. And we were sitting up on top of
this hill. And I had gone ahead and ordered food, an
evening meal. Normally, we got... in armor, we
would get one hot meal a day. Infantry guys, I know
guys that had been there that never had a hot meal
the whole time they were there. They were lucky to
even have food. They ate from these cans? Yeah,
they'd have C-rations or what they call LERP
rations, which were dehydrated type food, and
you'd add a little water. How'd y'all get hot
meals? Okay. This particular incident, I had
called in and said, I want food for 200 people, I
mean 100 people. They brought it out on a little
deal called a 5-4-A, which is like a pickup on
tracks, wheels and tracks. Anyway, this little
deal is coming across the ground out there. Of
course, my platoon, we're just like a bunch of old
hogs, you know. The guy set up all the food. I'm
talking about roast beef, mashed potatoes,
gravy, jello with lettuce, you know, and cold milk
and chocolate pudding. And these guys, these
infantry guys sitting over there watching all
this stuff, or my guys, leap down on top of it like
they're used to. You know, one waits for the other,
got real good manners, like one hog waits for
another. And so... And I just grabbed my plate, and
that's, you know, after my guys got theirs. And
finally, I thought I had mentioned it to the
company commander that I was going to order food
for, but I guess I forgot to because he came over to
me and asked the lieutenant, he said, looks like
you have a little bit left there. You think some of
my people could get a bite of that? I said, oh, yeah,
I'm sorry, I forgot. I must not have told you. I
said, I'll order food for you guys, too. I said,
yeah, you can line the suckers up, you know. And so I
did, which is the first hot meal most of those guys
have ever had. since they had been in country. And
how were y'all able to get those males in? Well, we
had a forward fire base, what's called a fire base,
that was set up in a place close to what's called LZ
English, which is just north between Da Nang and
Cameron Bay, kind of halfway in the middle there.
And it was just a place where they resupplied those
people and where you could work on your tanks if you
needed to. There's a lot of administration that
goes on in any type of military unit. So that was
kind of the forward base camp. But anyway, those
guys, after they got that hot meal, You know, they
thought that they kind of liked us after that for a
while, you know. And most of those guys, I wish I had
my pictures because I could show you and talk at the
same time. But most of those guys, I mean, there's
no fat on them at all. They're sleek because all
they do is walk and not eat very well, you know, and
sweat a lot. But anyway, I kind of fattened them up
there a little bit. But anyway, I started carrying
it. Their normal rucksacks probably weigh
anywhere from 55 to 80 pounds that they strap on
their backs. And they probably hike an average of
15 clicks a day, 15 kilometers a day, which is about
11 miles. And all they do is walk around out there.
So I started humping their rucks for them and
carrying their mortars for them. getting their
food, their ammunition, their mail, everything I
was getting for them. And they, after a while, you
know, they just really didn't like us. You know,
because then I really kind of spoiled them because
I just started carrying them. They'd just hop on
the back of the tank. Yeah, the tanks looked like a
bunch of Sooners from Oklahoma heading to
California back during the Depression. And it was
almost comical what we looked like, I'm sure, to
other people, but beats walking. And they kind of
thought it did, too. While y'all were moving, were
y'all with those people in your tank? Was it
snipers by each other? Oh, yeah, you'd have stuff
like that. Usually, you kind of knew what to expect
most of the time. You know because you'd have
intelligence reports that you know the bad guys
over here in this area you go find them go get them
you know, and you just kind of just hunt them down
like a covey of quail and You know just track them
down and get rid of them and We did some joint
operations with the Vietnamese National Police
We did some joint operations with with other
Vietnamese armored units and and areas all over
the coastal area.
After I, after I'd been with them for a couple
months, MACV, which was the Military Assistance
Command Vietnam, which was the political arm of
the Army, started levying all the USRV units,
which is the United States Army regular units,
United States Army Vietnam, which was the
American fighting units, they started sending
out orders to those guys saying, we want you to send
us captains, lieutenants, and E7s. And they
formed 350 of what they called mobile advisory
teams. And some genius had finally decided that if
they were going to win this deal, there was going to
have to be one at the grassroots level or at the
little village level. The Vietnamese army had
just a horrendous AWOL rate. And they decided to
quit fighting. They left and they went home for a
while, you know. They weren't disciplined. Well,
it's not that they weren't disciplined. It's just
they've already been doing this 20 years, you
know. So if you're going to save your family,
you've got to just take off every once in a while.
So, I mean, you never knew what you were going to be
left with with those people. And that was kind of a
bad thing for Americans to do. adapt to because
you're used to thinking, well, I've got so much,
and this is what I'm going to deal with. You find out
you don't have that. So I got, in order to be chosen
for one of these mobile advisory teams, you had to
have had at least four months in country, and you
had to have at least four months left in country. so
they could get a little mileage out of you. So they
didn't want to just take the green troops and throw
them into a deal that would probably be
disastrous. And then they didn't, you know, if
you're going to be leaving next week, it wouldn't
be a good idea either, you know. So they formed 350
of these mobile advisory teams, and they sent us to
a school down in Zeon, which is just outside of
Saigon. And we had... to get completely retrained
on all new weapons, which was M1 rifles, M1 and M2
carbines, 60mm mortars, and BARs, which was
Browning Automatic Rifles. All these weapons
were all leftovers from World War II. And that's
what we had given the South Vietnamese to use,
where a standard American would have an M16 as his
rifle. So y'all were using this all the time?
Right. Well, it's not that I still use the M16, but,
and of course I supplied my own self, took care of
all my own supplies. And, but, but the Vietnamese
units had the old equipment, you know, 30 caliber
machine gun. Of course, in our infinite wisdom of
our government and so many things that they did
over there, it's just one stupid blunder after
another. they give a Vietnamese soldier an M1
rifle that weighs 9 1â„2 pounds, and if he's got it
sitting on the ground, the butt of the rifle on the
ground, it hits him somewhere between his chin and
his ear. So it'd be kind of like somebody giving
your eye a flagpole and say, you know, This is your
weapon. Well, it's too long and it's too big, you
know, and it just about pulls them over. Time to get
it up. It weighs so much, you know, it's hard for
them to use. But they liked the little M1, M2
carbines, but they were in such poor condition,
you could sit there and shake them and the bolt
would fall out, which is a receiving bolt, you
know, which seats the bullet when it goes in and
out. It was just a terrible deal. But the idea
behind the mobile advisory team was to go out and
round up all the males in the villages where these
people lived, and equip them, and train them, and
then go out on operations with them. So they gave
us, we had 35 hours, 35 classroom hours of
Vietnamese language. And they said, now go train
an army.
Now, that's a real
hopeful situation, you know. And in my particular
situation, they sent us up to a little town called
Bami Tut, which is about 10 miles this side of
Cambodia.
This particular town was the capital of all the
Montagnard people, which are kind of like Indians
in the United States. They don't speak
Vietnamese. And you're trained in Vietnamese?
Yeah. Well, you had half Vietnamese and half
Montagnards. Well, you know, the French had been
over there for 20 years, and some of them spoke a
little French. And, you know, you can't help but
live someplace with no few words, and so some of
them spoke a little Vietnamese. And of course, the
Americans had been there for a while, so some of
them knew a little English. And so I actually
bought a French book, a little paperback French
book. And with that and a little English and a
little Vietnamese. And the particular people I
was around was a tribe that spoke what they called
Rade Montagnard. It's kind of like Apache or
Navajo or something like that. So I got this guy to
teach me, write down a bunch of words that I felt
like I needed and how to speak those words. And so I
just memorized all those words in Rite A. So with a
little bit of Rite A, a little bit of French, a
little bit of English, and a little bit of
Vietnamese, we could communicate that and draw
lots of pictures in the dirt. So language there is a
big factor. Big factor. Of course, here you got
America. Again, they give me an interpreter,
right? Now, how do we as Americans, you know, if we
want to find out if you know anything, what do we do?
We stick a pencil in their hand and we give them a
test, right? You know what we do? Well, my little
interpreter, you know, that's real good. He could
translate on paper, dog. you know, in English to
dog in Vietnamese, and get them, you know, back and
forth, but he couldn't speak. He couldn't speak it
at all? Very little. So, and he used to get me in a lot
of trouble, because, of course, you know, I would
say things, and he would kind of think he
understood what I was saying, and he would say
things, because I'm a village chief, You know, and
boy, I could tell Vilshi all of a sudden, like he's
insulted, you know. And I said, you know, come on. I
said, what did you tell him? You know, I told him, I
said, no, that's not right. That's not what I
meant. You know, so he had some real communication
problems. Yeah, it was bad. But this was, but what
we would do is we would teach these people infantry
tactics, which is ground, you know, type tactics.
tactics, and then we'd go out on operations with
them. I had five regional force companies and ten
regional, what they call popular force platoons,
which is just kind of rounded up everybody in a
small village, and they call them a popular force
platoon. So I had ten of those little platoons and
five companies. The companies usually would
guard a stationary object like a bridge or radio
station, electric power generating station, you
know, something like that. They would have a
mission to do something. The little popular force
type guys, they were just kind of supposed to
defend themselves, be intelligence gathering
people out there for us, but yet they would go in
operations with us too. Sometimes we'd have a
joint operation, we'd pull in a bunch of platoon, a
couple companies, and you'd go out and do your
thing that day. Tell me a little bit about the
action that you were involved in with the
infantry. Okay. Kind of like describe the scenery
and how you... I was up in an area in what they call a
two-corps. Vietnam was broken down into four
different corps. There was I-Corps, which that
was mainly... The Marines were up north. 2 Corps
was kind of a mountainous type region. 3 Corps was
kind of between the mountainous up to about
Saigon. And 4 Corps was kind of all of the Delta area
where it was all rivers and all that kind of stuff.
Lots of water, lots of rice paddies. There's rice
paddies all over the country, but I'm talking
about just all rice paddies, you know. Just all
water. I wasn't down south, I was kind of in the
north to north central portion of Vietnam, mostly
mountain type terrain, lots of vegetation.
There was a lot of coffee, tea, rubber
plantations, lots of bananas, pineapples, that
kind of plants growing around the area, even on a
commercial basis. One of the really frustrating
things for, I guess, everyone that was over there,
kind of standing order was that if you got shot at
from a coffee-tear rubber plantation, you were
not allowed to shoot back into these plantations
because you were liable to damage a plant, you
know. And it takes three years to grow a tea bush to
maturity, you know, And so apparently our
government felt like that the three-year-old T.
Bush was a whole lot more valuable than some 19,
20-year-old kid, which was kind of frustrating if
it was you, you know. What did y'all do? You just
couldn't fire back? You just had to sit there while
they fired at you? Yeah, or leave, you know. That
was usually like in daytime operations. There
again... I thought one of the more civilized
things that I found when I was in Vietnam was that
basically from about one o'clock in the afternoon
to about three or four, it would just kind of cease
fire. I mean, it just kind of, you know, take a
siesta, let's call this thing off for a while,
everybody kings eggs, and nothing ever happened.
Yeah, everybody just says, let's just rest up for
tonight, you know, or, you know, you've done your
thing for the morning, well, hit it again tonight,
and, you know, have a little lunch, and, You know,
just kind of rest for a while. So it was kind of
weird, some of the things that went on over there.
You
had asked earlier about what it felt like about the
first time that somebody had shot at you and that
kind of atmosphere. I was kind of, I guess,
probably like everybody else. You don't know how
you're going to react. You know, can I shoot that
guy? I don't even know him, you know.
You kind of have those thoughts. You think about
that before, but the first time somebody shot at
me, there was no doubt in my mind that I could pull
the trigger and did. It's just automatic. Oh,
yeah, it's just automatic. You know, when you're
sitting here in the United States, it's real fine
to have some real high ideals and, of course,
conscientious objectors, Back in the mid-60s, it
was kind of a big deal. The press gave it a lot of
notoriety and that kind of stuff. It was my
experience, without exception, every
conscientious objector that I ever met, most of
whom were talked into by their recruiter, said,
well, you don't want to carry a weapon. No, I
wouldn't want to kill anybody in it. So their
recruiters would say, well, then you're saying
you would like to help people. Is that what you're
trying to say? Oh, yeah. Then you'd like maybe some
medical field. Would that be good? They'd say,
well, yeah, that'd probably be fine. And so they
would make them combat medics. Well, little did
they know what the combat medic does. It isn't a
hospital. It isn't a mass unit. You're out there
with the infantry. And when you have these nice,
fine ideas, in the United States, it's awful easy
to stand on a soapbox and spout them off. But when
that other side doesn't know about your fine
ideas, and you don't have the protective aspects
of the continental United States, and you're a
congressman, and you're a senator at the right
home if something doesn't please you, I mean,
that'd kill you. And all of a sudden, you
understand the real world as opposed to the more
idyllic world of liberty.